\glsresetall

\url{https://ptpb.pw/b7_V.png}

This thesis presents a collection of static and dynamic snapshots of diverse
microbial systems. Although our new methods are in no way specific to the human
gut, part of our focus has been to bridge the gap between computation and
biology, to get us closer towards a future where drug prescription, diet and
recreational activities can be further \textit{personalized} -- through a layer
invisible to the naked eye but perceivable in most respects of life.

It seems impossible to accurately predict the impact of scientific discoveries,
historically, we have seen great evidence of seemingly anachronistic findings
(for example neural networks \cite{Tem10}) that later, usually
when other technologies catch up, become new fields of research or cornerstones
in consumer applications.  Therefore, while acknowledging this is a tough
problem, here I present my personal view on future directions that can build up
from some of the contributions in this thesis. I divide these into three 
sections: diagnostic, treatment and analysis.

\section{Diagnostic}

In Chapter~\ref{chapter_dogs} and Chapter~\ref{chapter_ibds}, we presented
examples of disease biomarkers from two different analytical perspectives.

First, in a dog cohort, we showed that we can reformulate the dysbiosis index 
we originally developed for humans in \cite{Gevers2014}, and make it 
specific for a different host\hyp{}specie. Both in humans and dogs, this 
log-ratio of bacterial groups is associated with decreased diversity, and in 
humans is also associated with inflammation. Next, after noticing the increased 
volatility in the microbiome of subjects with \gls{ibd}, we propose microbial 
variability in fecal samples as an effective classifier for disease. This 
method is powerful because it overcomes the low classification accuracy of 
fecal samples, and improves as more samples per subject are collected.

Although both approaches are encouraging, translating research into 
consumer\hyp{}level applications, commonly presents formidable challenges that 
might only be solvable by future generations.  Take for example the \gls{ecg}, 
it took almost 125 years, between the first observation of 
biopotentials\footnote{Credited to Luigi Galvani in 1787.}, and the moment when 
the first table \gls{ecg}\footnote{Willem Einthoven's ectrocardiograph 
manufactured by the Cambridge Scientific Instrument Company of London in 1911.} 
became commercially available \cite{ECGZywietz}. Even after the tremendous 
progress, proper validation of computer-generated diagnostics only appeared 
more than 200 years after the initial discovery \cite{njem_ecg}.

I use the example of the \gls{ecg}, because much like raw heart biopotentials,
(\textit{i}) microbiome data is plagued with noise, and (\textit{ii})
determining the appropriate filters and thresholds directly depends on the
use-case. However, unlike with the early developments of the \gls{ecg}, we live
in digital and connected world. As such, the following focuses will
shorten the time between discovery and innovation:

\begin{description}

  \item[Mechanistic Studies]The novelty characteristic of microbiome studies,
  has produced a large amount of descriptive studies, contrastingly,
  mechanistic experiments have lagged in validating many of these findings 
  (likely due to the more expensive requirements).  If the goal is to relate 
  the presence or abundance of a microbiome feature to disease state or 
  biochemical process, the underlying methods must be informed
  by biological inferences in order for these biomarkers to be credible.

  \item[Open Data]Medical research is specially affected by human factors,
  being able to consistently collect samples from a subject is not always easy
  or deterministic (think of bowel problems and fecal samples). A powerful
  practice used to counter underpowered studies, is to improve on the current
  sample size through the reuse of previously published data. The availability
  of open resources like Qiita\footnote{\url{https://qiita.ucsd.edu/}}, makes
  data reuse seamless. Importantly, the work in this thesis was only possible
  through the reuse of existing data (see Chapter~\ref{exploratory_chapter}
  through Chapter~\ref{chapter_fmts}).

  Although making data openly available is an important first step, proper
  standardization of processing protocols, will also be key to maximizes data 
  usability, a remarkable example of this practice is the \gls{emp} 
  \cite{RN4267}.

\end{description}

\section{Treatment}

Although most \glspl{fmt} succeed at treating \gls{cdi}, what makes a
successful transplant is not clear yet, the number of variables implicated in
answering this question is immense. From a computational complexity standpoint,
determining whether or not a new community can colonize an existing ecosystem
is considered a hard problem \cite{RN4266}. Therefore, we must continue to
expand our understanding, through the app

\section{Analysis}

The nature of microbiome data is high-dimensional, and often noisy, thus the
necessity for the exploratory and analytical techniques as presented in
previous chapters.

Much like our microbial symbionts depend on the host environment (and vice
versa), the development and funding of analytical tools depends on the
ever-growing necessity to unravel complex patterns in a number of experimental
setups (cross-sectional, longitudinal, multi-'omic, etc). Thus, these tools,
must take into consideration the ability to be flexible, scalable and when
possible interactive. The following is a brief justification of why these are
important factors:

Customization is always possible, but interactivity fosters creativity and
leads people to ask more questions.

At the beginning of this thesis, it was hard to know what the impact of the
work here would be, quickly we realized that the impact had been large,

